---
title: Reflections on Ten Years Past The Snowden Revelations
abbrev: Ten Years After
docname: draft-farrell-tenyearsafter-00
category: info
submissionType: independent

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: S. Farrell
    name: Stephen Farrell
    org: Trinity College, Dublin
    country: Ireland
    email: stephen.farrell@cs.tcd.ie
 -
    ins: F. Badii
    name: Farzaneh Badii
    email: farzaneh.badii@gmail.com
 -
    ins: B. Schneier
    name: Bruce Schneier
    org: Harvard University
    email: schneier@schneier.com

normative:

informative:
    guard2013:
        title: NSA collecting phone records of millions of Verizon customers daily
        author:
          name: Glenn Greenwald
          organization: The Guardian
        date: 6 Jun 2013
    ACME:
        title: Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME)
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/acme/
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
    BoF-session:
        title: IETF 88 BoF session
        target: https://www.ietf.org/proceedings/88/perpass.html
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2013
    CFRG:
        title: IRTF Crypto Forum (CFRG) 
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/cfrg/
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
    CURDLE:
        title: curdle WG
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/curdle/
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
    dual-ec:
        target: https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/767.pdf
        title: Dual EC, A standardized back door
        author:
            -
                name: Daniel Bernstein
            - 
                name: Tanja Lange
            -
                name: Ruben Niederhagen
        date: 2016
    LE:
        target: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3319535.3363192
        title: Let's Encrypt - an automated certificate authority to encrypt the entire web
        author:
            -
                name: Josh Aas 
            -
                name: Richard Barnes
            -
                name: Benton Case
            -
                name: Zakir Durumeric
            -
                name: Peter Eckersley
            -
                name: Alan Flores-L{\'o}pez
            -
                name: Alex Halderman
            -
                name: Jacob Hoffman-Andrews
            -
                name: James Kasten
            -
                name: Eric Rescorla
            -
                name: Seth Shoen
            -
                name: Brad Warren
        date: 2019
    MADINAS: 
        title: MADINAS WG
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/madinas/)
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
    perpass:
        title: perpass mailing list
        target: https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/perpass/
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
    plenary-video:
        title: IETF 88 Pleary video
        target: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oV71hhEpQ20&pp=ygUQaWV0ZiA4OCBwbGVuYXJ5IA%3D%3D
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2013
    refs-to-7258:
        title: References to RFC7258
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc7258/referencedby/)
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
    timeline:
        title: Global surveillance disclosures (2013–present)
        target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance_disclosures_(2013%E2%80%93present)
        author:
            organization: Wikimedia foundation
        date: 2023
    STRINT:
        title: A W3C/IAB workshop on Strengthening the Internet Against Pervasive Monitoring (STRINT)
        target: https://www.w3.org/2014/strint/
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2014
    Toronto:
        title: Canada Used Airport Wi-Fi To Track Travelers, Snowden Leak Alleges
        author:
            organization: National Public Radio
        target: https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2014/01/31/269418375/airport-wi-fi-used-to-track-travelers-snowden-leak-alleges
    UTA:
        title: Using TLS in Applications working group (UTA) working group
        author:
            organization: IETF
        date: 2023
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/uta/

    
    
--- abstract

This memo contains the thoughts and recountings of events that
transpired during and after the release of information about the
NSA by Edward Snowden.  There are three perspectives: that of
a security area director of the IETF, a human rights expert, and
of someone who was involved with sifting through the information
to responsibly inform the public.  The purpose of this memo is
to provide some historical perspective, while at the same time
offering a view as to what security challenges the technical
community should consider.

--- middle

Introduction
============

On June 6th, 2013, an article appeared in _The Guardian_
{{guard2013}} that was the beginning of a series of what have come to
be known as revelations about the activities of the United States
National Security Agency (NSA).  These activities included, amongst
others, secret court orders, secret agreements for the receipt of
so-called "meta-information" that includes source, destination, and
timing of communications, tapping of communications lines, and other
activities.  The breathtaking scope of the operations shocked the
Internet technical community, and led to a sea change within the
IETF, IAB, and many parts of the private sector.

Now that some years have past, it seems appropriate to reflect on that
period of time, what effect the community's actions had, where
security has improved, how the threat surface has evolved, what areas
haven't improved, and where the community might invest future efforts.

This compendium of essays first brings us back to 2013 with an essay
by Bruce Schneier, about how it was for him and others to report what
was happening, and the mindset of those involved.  Next, Stephen
Farrell reviews the technical community's reactions, technical
advances, and where threats remain.  Then Farzaneh Badii discusses the
impact of those advances – or lack thereof – on human rights.  Finally
Steve Bellovin...

Note that each essay reflects the views of the contributor of that
work, and may not reflect the views of others.

Although four people write here about their views, readers are invited
to reflect for themselves about that time, the intervening time, and
what we as a community can do to address security and privacy of
citizens of the world.


 -- Eliot Lear, Independent Submissions Editor


IETF and Internet Technical community reaction - Stephen
=======

Disclaimer (better elsewhere in document): the text below provides the author's
perspective and of course is limited and likely omits important things.

In 2013, the IETF and, more broadly, the Internet technical, security and
privacy research communities, were surprised by the surveillance and attack
efforts exposed by the Snowden revelations.  {{timeline}} While the
potential for such was known, it was the scale and pervasiveness of the
activities disclosed that was alarming and, I think it fair to say, quite
annoying, for very many Internet engineers.

As for the IETF's reaction, informal meetings during the July 2013 IETF meeting
in Berlin indicated that IETF participants considered that these revelations
showed that we needed to do more to improve the security and privacy properties
of IETF protocols, and to help ensure deployments made better use of the
security and privacy mechanisms that already existed. In August, the IETF setup
a new mailing list {{perpass}} that ended up being a useful venue for triaging
proposals for work on these topics. At the November 2013 IETF meeting, there
was a lively and very well attended plenary session {{plenary-video}} on
"hardening the Internet" against such attacks, followed by a "birds of a
feather" {{BoF-session}} devoted to more detailed discussion of possible
actions in terms of new working groups, protcols and best-current-practice
(BCP) documents that could help improve matters.  This was followed in
February/March 2014 by a joint IAB/W3C workshop on "strengthening the Internet
against pervasive monitoring" {{STRINT}} in London attended by 150 engineers
(still the only IAB workshop in my experience where we needed to setup a
wait-list for people who wanted to attend after capacity for the venue was
reached:-). The workshop report was eventually published as {{?RFC7687}} in
2015, but in the meantime work proceeeded on a best-current-practice document
codifying that the IETF community considered that "pervasive monitoring is an
attack" {{?RFC7258}} (aka BCP188). The IETF last-call discussion for that short
document included more than 1000 emails - while there was broad agreement on
the overall message, a number of IETF participants considered enshrining that
message in the RFC series and IETF processes was controversial, but in any case
the BCP was published in May 2014. The key statement on which rough consensus
was reached is in the abstract of RFC7258 and says "Pervasive monitoring is a
technical attack that should be mitigated in the design of IETF protocols,
where possible." That document has since been referenced {{refs-to-7258}} by
many IETF working groups and RFCs as justifying additional work on security and
privacy. Throughout this period and beyond, the repercussions of the Snowden
revelations was also a major and ongoing agenda item for both of the IETF's
main technical management bodies - the IAB and the IESG (on which the author of
this section served at the time).

So far, I've really only described the processes with which the IETF dealt with
the attacks, but there was of course also much technical work started by IETF
participants that was at least partly motivated by the Snowden revelations.

In November 2013 a working group was established to document better practices
for using TLS in applications {{UTA}} so that deployments would be less at risk
in the face of some of the attacks related to stripping TLS or having
appliations mis-use TLS APIs or parameters.  Similar work was done to update
recommendations for use of cryptography in other protocols in the {{CURDLE}}
working group later.  The CURDLE working group was to an extent created to
enable use of a set of new elliptic curves that had been documented by the IRTF
crypto forum research group. {{CFRG}} That work in turn had been partly
motivated by (perhaps ultimately unfounded) concerns about elliptic curves
defined in NIST standards, following the dual-ec debacle {{dual-ec}} where a
NIST random number generator had been deliberately engineered to produce output
that could be vulnerable to NSA attack.

Work to develop a new version of TLS was started in 2014, mainly due to
concerns that TLSv1.2 and earlier version implementations had been shown to be
vulnerable to a range of attacks over the years. The work to develop TLSv1.3
{{?RFC8446}} also however aimed to encrypt more of the handshake so as to
expose less information to network observers - a fairly direct result of the
Snowden relevations.  Work to further improve TLS in this respect continues
today using the so-called encrypted client hello (ECH) {{?I-D.ietf-tls-esni}}
mechanism to remove one of the last privacy leaks present in current TLS.

Work on ECH was enabled by significant developments to encrypt DNS traffic,
using DoT {{?RFC7858}} or DoH {{?RFC8484}} which also started as a result of
the Snowden relevations. Prior to that, privacy hadn't really been considered
when it came to DNS data or (more importantly) the act of accessing DNS data.
The trend towards encrypting DNS traffic represents a significant change for
the Internet, both in terms of reducing cleartext, but also in terms of moving
points-of-control. The latter aspect was, and remains, controversial, but the
IETF did it's job of defining new protocols that can enable better DNS privacy.
Work on HTTP version 2 {{?RFC7540}} and QUIC {{?RFC9000}} further demonstrates
the trend in the IETF towards always-encrypting protocols as the new norm, at
least at and above the transport layer.

Of course, not all these initiatives bore fruit, for example attempts to define
a new MPLS encryption mechanism {{?I-D.farrelll-mpls-opportunistic-encrypt}}
foundered due to a lack of interest and the existence of the already deployed
IEEE MACSEC scheme. But there has been a fairly clear trend towards trying to
remove cleartext from the Internet as a precursor to providing better privacy
when considering network observers as attackers.

The IETF of course, forms only one part of the broader Internet technical
community, and there were many non-IETF activities triggered by the Snowden
revelations, a number of which also eventually resulted in new IETF work to
standardise better security and privacy mechanisms developed elsewhere.

In 2013, the web was largely unencrypted despite HTTPS being relatively
usable and that was partly due to problems using the WebPKI at scale. The
LetsEncrypt {{LE}} initiatve was established in 2015 to try move the web
towards being fully encryted and has been extremely successful in helping
achieve that goal.  Subsequently, the automation protocols developed for
LetsEncrypt were standardised in the IETF's ACME {{ACME}} working group.

In 2013, most email transport between mail servers was cleartext,
directly enabling some of the attacks documented in the Snowden documents.
Significant effort by major mail services and MTA software developers since
then have resulted in more than 90% of email being encrypted between mail
servers and various IETF protocols have been defined in order to improve that
situation, e.g., MTA-STS. {{?rfc8461}}

Lastly, MAC addressees have historically been long-term fixed values visble to
local networks (and beyond), which enabled some tracking attacks that were
documented in the Snowden documents. {{Toronto}} The IEEE 802
standards group recognised this weakness and started work on MAC address
randomisation that in turn lead to the IETF's {{MADINAS}} working group that
aims to ensure randomised MAC addresses can be used on the Internet without
causing unintentional harm.

In summary, the significantly large volume of technical work pursued in the
IETF and elsewhere as a result of the Snowden revelations has focussed on two
main things: decreasing the amount of plaintext that remains visible to network
observers and secondly reducing the number of long-term identifiers that enable
unexpected identification or re-identification of devices or users. This work
is not by any means complete, nor is deployment universal, but significant
progress has been made and the work continues even if the level of annoyance
at the attack has faded somewhat over time.

One should also note that there has been push-back against these improvements
in security and privacy and the changes they cause for deployments. That has
come from more or less two camps - those on whom these improvements force
change tend to react badly, but later figure out how to adjust. The second camp
being those who seemingly prefer not to strenghten security so as to for
example continue to achieve what they call "visibility" even in the face of the
many engineers who correctly argue that such an anti-encryption approach
inevitably leads to worse security overall. The recurring nature of this kind
of push-back is nicely illustrated by {{?RFC1984}}. That informational document
was published in 1996 as an IETF response to an early iteration of the
perennial "encryption is bad" argument. In 2015, the unmodified 1996 text was
upgraded to a best-current-practice (BCP200) as the underlying arguments have
not, and will not, change.

Looking back on all the above from a 2023 vantage point, I think one can say
that, as a community of Internet engineers, we got a lot right, but that today
there's way more that needs to be done to better protect the security and
privacy of people who use the Internet. In particular, we (the technical
community) haven't done nearly as good a job at countering surveillance
capitalism which has exploded in the last decade. In part, that's because many
of the problems are outside of the scope of bodies such as the IETF, for
example, intrusive back-end sharing of people's data for advertising purposes
can't really be addressed via Internet protocols.  However, I also think it's
likely the case that the real level of annoyance felt with respect to the
Snowden revelations seems (in general) to not be felt nearly as much when it
comes to the legal but privacy-invasive activities of major employers of
Internet engineers. It's noteworthy that RFC7258 doesn't consider that bad
actors are limited to governments and personally, I think many advertising
industry schemes for collecting data are egregious examples of pervasive
monitoring and hence ought also be considered an attack on the Internet that
ought be mitigated where possible.  However, the Internet technical community
clearly hasn't acted in that way over the last decade.

Perhaps that indicates that Internet engineers and the bodies in which they
congregate need to place much more emphasis on standards for ethical behaviour
than has been the case for the first half-century of the Internet.  And while
it would be good to see the current leaders of Internet bodies work to make
progress in that regard, at the time of writing, it seems more likely that
Government regulators will be the ones to try force better behaviour. That of
course comes with a significant risk of having regulations that stymie the kind
of permissionless innovation that characterised many earlier Internet
successes.

So while we got a lot right in our reaction to Snowden's revelations,
currently, we have a "worse" Internet.  Nonetheless, I do still hope to see a
sea-change there though, as the importance of real Internet security and
privacy for people becomes utterly obvious to all, even the most hard core
capitalists and government signals intelligence agencies, but that's perhaps
because I'm just an optimist:-)

Farzaneh
========




Bruce Schneier: Snowden Ten Years Later
===========

In 2013 and 2014, I wrote extensively about new revelations regarding
NSA surveillance based on the documents provided by Edward
Snowden. But I had a more personal involvement as well.

I wrote the essay below in September 2013. The _New Yorker_ agreed to
publish it, but the _Guardian_ asked me not to. It was legitimately
scared of UK law enforcement, and worried that this essay would
reflect badly on it. And given that the UK police would raid its
offices in July 2014, it had legitimate cause to be worried.

Now, ten years later, I offer this as a time capsule of what those
early months of Snowden were like.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

It’s a surreal experience, paging through hundreds of top-secret NSA
documents. You’re peering into a forbidden world: strange, confusing,
and fascinating all at the same time.

I had flown down to Rio de Janeiro in late August at the request of
Glenn Greenwald. He had been working on the Edward Snowden archive for
a couple of months, and had a pile of more technical documents that he
wanted help interpreting. According to Greenwald, Snowden also thought
that bringing me down was a good idea.

It made sense. I have been writing about cryptography, security, and
privacy for decades. I could decipher some of the technical language
that Greenwald had difficulty with, and understand the context and
importance of various document. And I have long been publicly critical
of the NSA’s eavesdropping capabilities. My knowledge and expertise
could help figure out which stories needed to be reported.

I thought about it a lot before agreeing. This was before David
Miranda, Greenwald’s partner, was detained at Heathrow airport by the
UK authorities; but even without that, I knew there was a risk. I fly
a lot—a quarter of a million miles per year—and being put on a TSA
list, or being detained at the US border and having my electronics
seized, would be a major problem. So would the FBI breaking into my
home and seizing my personal electronics. But in the end, that made me
more determined to do it.

I did spend some time on the phone with the attorneys recommended to
me by the ACLU and the EFF. And I talked about it with my partner,
especially when Miranda was detained three days before my departure.
Both Greenwald and his employer, the _Guardian_, are careful about whom
they show the documents to. They publish only those portions essential
to getting the story out. It was important to them that I be a
co-author, not a source. I didn’t follow the legal reasoning, but the
point is that the _Guardian_ doesn’t want to leak the documents to
random people. It will, however, write stories in the public interest,
and I would be allowed to review the documents as part of that
process. So after a Skype conversation with someone at the _Guardian_, I
signed a letter of engagement.

And then I flew to Brazil.

I saw only a tiny slice of the documents, and most of what I saw was
surprisingly banal. The concerns of the top-secret world are largely
tactical: system upgrades, operational problems owing to weather,
delays because of work backlogs, and so on. I paged through weekly
reports, presentation slides from status meetings, and general
briefings to educate visitors. Management is management, even inside
the NSA Reading the documents, I felt as though I were sitting through
some of those endless meetings.

The meeting presenters try to spice things up. Presentations regularly
include intelligence success stories. There were details—what had been
found, and how, and where it helped—and sometimes there were attaboys
from “customers” who used the intelligence. I’m sure these are
intended to remind NSA employees that they’re doing good. It
definitely had an effect on me. Those were all things I want the NSA
to be doing.

There were so many code names. Everything has one: every program,
every piece of equipment, every piece of software. Sometimes code
names had their own code names. The biggest secrets seem to be the
underlying real-world information: which particular company
MONEYROCKET is; what software vulnerability EGOTISTICALGIRAFFE—really,
I am not making that one up—is; how TURBINE works. Those secrets
collectively have a code name—ECI, for exceptionally compartmented
information—and almost never appear in the documents. Chatting with
Snowden on an encrypted IM connection, I joked that the NSA cafeteria
menu probably has code names for menu items. His response: “Trust me
when I say you have no idea.”

Those code names all come with logos, most of them amateurish and a
lot of them dumb. Note to the NSA: take some of that more than
ten-billion-dollar annual budget and hire yourself a design
firm. Really; it’ll pay off in morale.

Once in a while, though, I would see something that made me stop,
stand up, and pace around in circles. It wasn’t that what I read was
particularly exciting, or important. It was just that it was
startling. It changed—ever so slightly—how I thought about the world.

Greenwald said that that reaction was normal when people started
reading through the documents.

Intelligence professionals talk about how disorienting it is living on
the inside. You read so much classified information about the world’s
geopolitical events that you start seeing the world differently. You
become convinced that only the insiders know what’s really going on,
because the news media is so often wrong. Your family is
ignorant. Your friends are ignorant. The world is ignorant. The only
thing keeping you from ignorance is that constant stream of classified
knowledge. It’s hard not to feel superior, not to say things like “If
you only knew what we know” all the time. I can understand how General
Keith Alexander, the director of the NSA, comes across as so
supercilious; I only saw a minute fraction of that secret world, and I
started feeling it.

It turned out to be a terrible week to visit Greenwald, as he was
still dealing with the fallout from Miranda’s detention. Two other
journalists, one from the Nation and the other from the _Hindu_, were
also in town working with him. A lot of my week involved Greenwald
rushing into my hotel room, giving me a thumb drive of new stuff to
look through, and rushing out again.

A technician from the _Guardian_ got a search capability working while I
was there, and I spent some time with it. Question: when you’re given
the capability to search through a database of NSA secrets, what’s the
first thing you look for? Answer: your name.

It wasn’t there. Neither were any of the algorithm names I knew, not
even algorithms I knew that the US government used.

I tried to talk to Greenwald about his own operational security. It
had been incredibly stupid for Miranda to be traveling with NSA
documents on the thumb drive. Transferring files electronically is
what encryption is for. I told Greenwald that he and Laura Poitras
should be sending large encrypted files of dummy documents back and
forth every day.

Once, at Greenwald’s home, I walked into the backyard and looked for
TEMPEST receivers hiding in the trees. I didn’t find any, but that
doesn’t mean they weren’t there. Greenwald has a lot of dogs, but I
don’t think that would hinder professionals. I’m sure that a bunch of
major governments have a complete copy of everything Greenwald
has. Maybe the black bag teams bumped into each other in those early
weeks.

I started doubting my own security procedures. Reading about the NSA’s
hacking abilities will do that to you. Can it break the encryption on
my hard drive? Probably not. Has the company that makes my encryption
software deliberately weakened the implementation for it?
Probably. Are NSA agents listening in on my calls back to the US? Very
probably. Could agents take control of my computer over the Internet
if they wanted to? Definitely. In the end, I decided to do my best and
stop worrying about it. It was the agency’s documents, after all. And
what I was working on would become public in a few weeks.

I wasn't sleeping well, either. A lot of it was the sheer magnitude of
what I saw. It's not that any of it was a real surprise. Those of us
in the information security community had long assumed that the NSA
was doing things like this. But we never really sat down and figured
out the details, and to have the details confirmed made a big
difference. Maybe I can make it clearer with an analogy. Everyone
knows that death is inevitable; there's absolutely no surprise about
that. Yet it arrives as a surprise, because we spend most of our lives
refusing to think about it. The NSA documents were a bit like
that. Knowing that it is surely true that the NSA is eavesdropping on
the world, and doing it in such a methodical and robust manner, is
very different from coming face-to-face with the reality that it is
and the details of how it is doing it.

I also found it incredibly difficult to keep the secrets. The
_Guardian_’s process is slow and methodical. I move much faster. I
drafted stories based on what I found. Then I wrote essays about those
stories, and essays about the essays. Writing was therapy; I would
wake up in the wee hours of the morning, and write an essay. But that
put me at least three levels beyond what was published.

Now that my involvement is out, and my first essays are out, I feel a
lot better. I'm sure it will get worse again when I find another
monumental revelation; there are still more documents to go through.

I’ve heard it said that Snowden wants to damage America. I can say
with certainty that he does not. So far, everyone involved in this
incident has been incredibly careful about what is released to the
public. There are many documents that could be immensely harmful to
the US, and no one has any intention of releasing them. The documents
the reporters release are carefully redacted. Greenwald and I
repeatedly debated with _Guardian_ editors the newsworthiness of story
ideas, stressing that we would not expose government secrets simply
because they’re interesting.

The NSA got incredibly lucky; this could have ended with a massive
public dump like Chelsea Manning’s State Department cables. I suppose
it still could. Despite that, I can imagine how this feels to the NSA
It’s used to keeping this stuff behind multiple levels of security:
gates with alarms, armed guards, safe doors, and military-grade
cryptography. It’s not supposed to be on a bunch of thumb drives in
Brazil, Germany, the UK, the US, and who knows where else, protected
largely by some random people’s opinions about what should or should
not remain secret. This is easily the greatest intelligence failure in
the history of ever. It’s amazing that one person could have had so
much access with so little accountability, and could sneak all of this
data out without raising any alarms. The odds are close to zero that
Snowden is the first person to do this; he’s just the first person to
make public that he did. It’s a testament to General Alexander’s power
that he hasn’t been forced to resign.

It’s not that we weren’t being careful about security, it’s that our
standards of care are so different. From the NSA’s point of view,
we’re all major security risks, myself included. I was taking notes
about classified material, crumpling them up, and throwing them into
the wastebasket. I was printing documents marked “TOP
SECRET/COMINT/NOFORN” in a hotel lobby. And once, I took the wrong
thumb drive with me to dinner, accidentally leaving the unencrypted
one filled with top-secret documents in my hotel room. It was an
honest mistake; they were both blue.

If I were an NSA employee, the policy would be to fire me for that alone.

Many have written about how being under constant surveillance changes
a person. When you know you’re being watched, you censor yourself. You
become less open, less spontaneous. You look at what you write on your
computer and dwell on what you’ve said on the telephone, wonder how it
would sound taken out of context, from the perspective of a
hypothetical observer. You’re more likely to conform. You suppress
your individuality. Even though I have worked in privacy for decades,
and already knew a lot about the NSA and what it does, the change was
palpable. That feeling hasn’t faded. I am now more careful about what
I say and write. I am less trusting of communications technology. I am
less trusting of the computer industry.

After much discussion, Greenwald and I agreed to write three stories
together to start. All of those are still in progress. In addition, I
wrote two commentaries on the Snowden documents that were recently
made public. There’s a lot more to come; even Greenwald hasn’t looked
through everything.

Since my trip to Brazil \[one month before\], I’ve flown back to the US
once and domestically seven times—all without incident. I’m not on any
list yet. At least, none that I know about.


\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*


As it happened, I didn’t write much more with Greenwald or the
_Guardian_. Those two had a falling out, and by the time everything
settled and both began writing about the documents
independently—Greenwald at the newly formed website the _Intercept_—I
got cut out of the process somehow. I remember hearing that Greenwald
was annoyed with me, but I never learned the reason. We haven’t spoken
since.

Still, I was happy with the one story I was part of: how the NSA hacks
Tor. I consider it a personal success that I pushed the _Guardian_ to
publish NSA documents detailing QUANTUM. I don’t think that would have
gotten out any other way. And I still use those pages today when I
teach cybersecurity to policymakers at the Harvard Kennedy School.

Other people wrote about the Snowden files, and wrote a lot. It was a
slow trickle at first, and then a more consistent flow. Between
Greenwald, Bart Gellman, and the _Guardian_ reporters, there ended up
being steady stream of news. (Bart brought in Ashkan Soltani to help
him with the technical aspects, which was a great move on his part,
even if it cost Ashkan a government job later.) More stories were
covered by other publications.

It started getting weird. Both Greenwald and Gellman held documents
back so they could publish them in their books. Jake Appelbaum, who
had not yet been accused of sexual assault by multiple women, was
working with Laura Poitras. He partnered with Spiegel to release an
implant catalog from the NSA’s Tailored Access Operations group. To
this day, I am convinced that that document was not in the Snowden
archives: that Jake got it somehow, and it was released under the
cover of Edward Snowden. I thought it was important enough that I
started writing about each item in that document in my blog: ”NSA
Exploit of the Week.” That got my website blocked by the DoD: I keep a
framed print of the censor’s message on my wall.

Perhaps the most surreal document disclosures were when artists
started writing fiction based on the documents. This was in 2016, when
the _Intercept_ finally built a secure room in New York to house the
documents. By then, the documents were years out of date, and now
they’re over a decade out of date. (They were leaked in 2013, but most
of them were from 2012 or before.)

I ended up being something of a public ambassador for the
documents. When I got back from Rio, I gave talks at a private
conference in Woods Hole, the Berkman Center at Harvard, something
called the Congress and Privacy and Surveillance in Geneva, events at
both CATO and New America in DC, an event at the University of
Pennsylvania, an event at EPIC and a “Stop Watching Us” rally in DC,
the RISCS conference in London, the ISF in Paris, and...then...at the
IETF meeting in Vancouver in November 2013. (I remember little of
this; I am reconstructing it all from my calendar.)

What struck me at the IETF was the indignation in the room, and the
calls to action. And there was action, across many fronts. We
technologists did a lot to help secure the Internet, for example.

The government didn’t do its part, though. Despite the public outcry,
investigations by Congress, pronouncements by President Obama, and
federal court rulings. I don’t think much has changed. The NSA
canceled a program here and a program there, and it is now more public
about defense. But I don’t think it is any less aggressive about
either bulk or targeted surveillance. Certainly its government
authorities haven’t been restricted in any way. And surveillance
capitalism is still the business model of the Internet.

And Edward Snowden? We were in contact for a while on Signal. I
visited him once in Moscow, in 2016. And I had him do an annual guest
lecture to my class at Harvard for a few years, remotely by
Jitsi. Afterwards, I would hold a session where I promised to answer
every question he would evade or not answer, explain every response he
did give, and be candid in a way that someone with an outstanding
arrest warrant simply cannot. Sometimes I thought I could channel
Snowden better than he could.

But now it’s been a decade. Everything he knows is old and out of
date. Everything we know is old and out of date. The NSA suffered an
even worse leak of its secrets by the Russians, under the guise of the
Shadow Brokers, in 2016 and 2017. The NSA has rebuilt. It again has
capabilities we can only surmise.


Security Considerations
=======================

Well...

IANA Considerations
===================

No changes to IANA processes are made by this memo.

--- back

Changes from Earlier Versions
=============================

Draft -00:

  * Initial revision
